A few weeks ago, Sean C. Davis wrote an article called ["The Evolution and the redefinition of Jamstack"](https://www.seancdavis.com/blog/jamstack-evolution-and-redefinition/), he had previously wrote [WTF is Jamstack](https://www.seancdavis.com/blog/wtf-is-jamstack/) back in 2018.

You can tell from both title that Jamstack is a very broad term coined by Netlify, for marketing purpose. It's a generic term to describe Netlify service, but the name sticked and is now use by every company out there trying to promote it's service that can be used through an API.

As Jeff Escalante wrote in a response, *JavaScript, APIs and Markup can be used on every website*,  you can build a IOS app with the very same API and it wouldn't be fall under the definition. Because the definition has to correspond to Netlify's current capabilities: static assets served from a CDN, possibly running serverless functions also on the edge (as close as possible to the end user) to deliver very performant websites.

A lot of tools allow you to generate a static output, your IDE if you write raw HTML, the first generation of static site generators that includes amongst many others Jekyll, Hugo and Eleventy can do that. React Frameworks like Next.js or Gatby, Vue frameworks like Nuxt.js or Gridsome, Sveltte Kit, the latest tool from the Snowpack team called Astro can do that. The common thing about all those tools is that they can output **static** assets and coupled to Git, it allows you to leverage à continuous deployment service (Netlifly, but also Vercel, CloudFlare, GitHub, etc.). Before Netlify coined the term, those sites were simply refered as **static** and it was not pejorative. It was simply describing the frontend output, generate with very modern tools and workdlows.

But Netlify's vision was to democratize microservices architec
