A few weeks ago, Sean C. Davis wrote an article called ["The Evolution and the redefinition of Jamstack"](https://www.seancdavis.com/blog/jamstack-evolution-and-redefinition/), he had previously wrote [WTF is Jamstack](https://www.seancdavis.com/blog/wtf-is-jamstack/) back in 2018.

You can tell from both title that Jamstack is a very broad term that needs some explanation. Jamstack was coined by Netlify back in 2017 for marketing purpose. It's a generic term to describe Netlify service that groups very different things: Git-based workflow, continuous deployment, atomic deployment, CDNs, JavaScript, and more is being added to the mix as time goes by. The Jamstack term sticked, being intensively hammered at conferences and soon got also used by every othere company out there trying to promote its service that can be consumed through an API.

As [Jeff Escalante](https://twitter.com/jescalan) rightly points out, *JavaScript, APIs and Markup can be used on every website*.  The Web is my jam and you can  build a IOS app with a headless CMS API but it wouldn't fall under the definition because the app is served natively. And that's a bit of the issue here, **the definition has to correspond to Netlify's current capabilities**: static assets served from a CDN, possibly running serverless functions also on the edge (as close as possible to the end user) to deliver very performant websites.

A lot of tools allow you to generate a static output, your IDE if you write good old HTML, static site generators that includes amongst many others Jekyll, Hugo and Eleventy. React Frameworks like Next.js or Gatby, Vue frameworks like Nuxt.js or Gridsome, Sveltte Kit, the latest tool from the Snowpack team called [Astro](https://astro.build/) can do that. The common pattern here is that all these tools can output **static** assets and when coupled to Git, allows you to leverage à continuous deployment service (Netlifly, but also Vercel, CloudFlare, GitHub, etc.). Before Netlify coined the term, those sites were simply refered as **static** and it was not pejorative, but it didn't sound very innovative. It was simply describing the frontend **output**, generated with modern tools and workdlows.
n
Netlify's vision was always to democratize [**microservices**](https://www.netlify.com/blog/2019/11/18/what-are-microservices/) architectures, and they added **serverless** [functions](https://www.netlify.com/blog/2018/03/20/netlifys-aws-lambda-functions-bring-the-backend-to-your-frontend-workflow/) (an abstraction of AWS Lambda) in 2018, and later background functions, and now On Demand Rendering (also based on AWS Lambda). Meanwhile Vercel (formerly Now) and Cloudflare have also developped very good platforms to deliver very fast websites, each actor is trying to address scalability issues, with Incremental Static Generation or Workers for instace. Note, that they just name the feature, not the entire stack, they don't need to.

In 2021 a site hosted on Netllify can mix all of those, static assets, serverless functions and on demand rendering, which is great as demonstrated by Zach Leatherman on Eleventy's website can [save a lot of time on your builds](https://twitter.com/zachleat/status/1402687220541165568), if your assets don't change between builds. But with new powers, the former definition of the Jamstack doesn't cut it anymore.

While the initial promise was that it was easier to scale a static website, builds were always the bottlneck. Even today deploying a large static website with more than 10K pages can be painful and frameworks like Next.js or [Remix Run](https://remix.run/features) choosed to address this problem by leveraging Server Side Rendering or HTTP Caching, other think [HTML over websocket](https://alistapart.com/article/the-future-of-web-software-is-html-over-websockets/) would be the best of both world to develop server side application with a reactive front-end.

One thing is for sure, you don't build large websites in 2021 like you would in 1997 when I started coding HTML. The goal of the Jamstack term has also always been a way to sum up all the trends we see happen in the web development:

- Control version systems like Git have changed the way we collaborate and ship code, many services allow you to deploy automatically on push, allowing for **atomic deployments**.
- Component-based approach has gone mainstream, large websites are often built with Deisgn Systems, more and more are using standards **Web Components**.
- Client-side JavaScript has evolved, and you can now import **ESM modules** in browsers, and load some JavaScript only when necessary.
- You can add Services Workers and serve your site as a **Progressive Web App**, even make it available offine.
- You now have thousands of **APIs** at your disposal to enrich your site functionality: payment, shopping cart, search, even databases are now available as a service, more and more are available through ** GraphQL**.
- You can execute some parts of your code in the Cloud, serverless functions were first introduced by Amazon and now Microsoft, Google and other proviers all compete on that front. Netlify is an abstraction on top of those providers.

And this is just the tip of the iceberg, from HTTP to Browser APIs, WASM and many more, tech is always evolving.

Software is hard, and marketing does its best to sell products to developers, and developer relations are the main way to sell tech, if if we can lock you to our platform that's great. So before using one of those vague marketing term, please think twice on what problem you need to solve, don't start from a solution (I'm gonna build a React website, or I'm gonna build a "Jamstack site" (WTF is that is a legit question?), embrace progressive enhancement and Web standards, learn the basics, before thinking you need to use all of the latest tech to get a job or to power a blog. Web Pages are getting heavier and developers are the ones responsible for delivery and performance. 

There's a good chance a decoupled front-end served from the edge might make sense if you're mainly servnig content to users, but with SSR, Serveless, Database as a Service, microservices, the frontier between purely static and purely dynamic are more and more blurry and going hybrid might be the key for large projects, serve as many static assets as you can from the edge and rely on servers to render dynamic pages when you need to. 

It's really great to see Netlify push for modern web architecture, and other services do the same, it's a great time to be a developer, you can focus on your product and worry less and less about the hardware. Just call it modern if you want, that would be as appropriate as Jamstack, state what is decoupled and distributed, you can even name your stack (Next/React/Vercel is NRV - fun fact, in french "énervé (N.R.V)" means angry) but please don't call your site Jamstack because a marketing team calls it that way, or say I deployed my latest site on Netlify. That's cool, I would love to see what you build, but we do not need for more buzzwords, we need creative people being able to understand when to leverage today's technology to solve problems in a smart way.

We should be talking about solving problems, rather than trying to help a VC funded company with its Marketing. At this point Jamstack could be considered harmful for leading you to think it's all you have at your disposal to solve your problems. Stay open.
